PASTE PLAIN PROSE TEXT BELOW THIS LINE.
Resume from: page 116, the paragraph beginning "The importance of average numbers arises from the fact that..."
(Everything up through the middle of page 116 — ending "...but it is usually called the probability that anything is a man." — is already in index.html.)

Skip: the big number tables on pages 25-46 of the source PDF (the raw observation data — not needed).
Keep: the small comparison table on page 125 (Bradley's Sirius/Procyon table) — just paste it as plain rows, I'll turn it into an HTML table.
Leave formulas/equations out — just type "[FORMULA]" as a placeholder where one occurs and I'll fill those in myself from the page images, since that's the part I actually need to do carefully (especially the π/e symbols).

---START PASTING BELOW---


114
114 WRITINGS OF CHARLES S. PEIRCE, 1872-1878
On the Theory of Errors of Observations
P 77: Coast Survey Report 1870, 200-224
The object of this paper is to give a general account of the theory
of errors of observations, with the design of showing what the limita-
tions to the applicability of the method of least squares are, and what
course is to be pursued when that method fails. We shall begin with
an elementary account of the general principles of the subject, in
order to state them with a little more accuracy than is commonly
done.
The notation employed is one which has been suggested by the
study of the logic of relations. Small Roman letters will denote objects
partly indeterminate. Thus m may denote a man, without saying
what man. Small Italics will be used for relative terms; thus / may
denote a lover. The correlates of such relative terms will be written
after them on the same line; thus tm or /m may denote a tooth of
a man or a lover of a man, if m denotes man, t a tooth of and / a lover
of something undetermined. Then, /w will denote a lover of a
woman, it being indeterminate what lover and what woman, tl w will
denote a tooth of a lover of a woman. If we wish to denote that which
is a lover of all women, we must have a symbol to denote all women.
As [x] is commonly used in the method of least squares to denote the
sum of all the quantities x, so we may write [w] to denote all women,
and then / [w] will denote something which is a lover of all women,
or we may write the same thing thus, / w. A relative term has a double
indeterminacy, being indeterminate in reference to the relate and
also in reference to the correlate. A lover may be this lover, that
lover, or the other lover, and each of these may be lover of this, or
that, or the other. Corresponding, therefore, to the [/], which
denotes all lovers, we may write {/} to denote the lover to whomever
he is a lover. Thus, {/ j w will denote a lover of nothing but women,
or we may write the same thing thus, lw. We may denote "loved by"
by*'.
Theory of Errors of Observation, 1873 115
Corresponding to any absolute term, as man, there is a relative
term, "man that is," as in the expression "a man that is rich." I shall
denote a relative of this sort by the symbol for the absolute term, with
an inverted comma after it, as mv Thus, if b denotes anything black,
m< b will denote a man that is black.
Let V be the relative "a general name which is applicable to."
Thus, Vm will denote a general term which is applicable to some
man. Vm will denote a general term which is applicable to every
man. Vm< Fw will be a general term which is applicable to every man
and to every woman. K V [Vm< Vw] will denote that to which every
general term is applicable which is applicable to every man and to
every woman; in other words, this denotes either a man or a woman.
I shall write this for short m +, w.
Zero is defined by the general equation x +, 0 = x, whatever x
may be. Then, zero generally denotes nothing.
Unity is defined by the general equation x< 1 = x, whatever x may
be, and then 1 generally will denote anything.
But 1 and 0 have sometimes to be interpreted as relative terms.
Now, it can be proved by the principles of the logic of relatives that
so considered Ox = 0, unless x = 0, when 0° = 1; and that Ix = 1,
unless x = 0, when 10 = 0. It follows that Ox is such a logical functionl
of x that it signifies "the case of the non-existence of," while 1* is such
a logical function of x that it signifies "the case of the existence of."
[m]
Since [m] denotes all men, we may naturally write -—- to denote m
what all men become when that factor is removed which makes [m]
refer to men rather than to anything else; that is to say, to denote the
number of men. We may write this for short [m] with heavy brackets.
Then t being a relative term, ("a tooth of,") by [tl] will be denoted
the total number of teeth in the universe. But [t] will be used as
[tl]
equivalent to -WA or the average number of teeth that anything has.
[l]
But "anything" is not to be taken here in an absolute sense. We
always limit our considerations entirely to a certain class. As De
Morgan expresses it, we always have a limited universe. When we
reckon up the number of all things to find the average number of
teeth per thing, it would be absurd to count among things the virtues,
1. A mathematical function of*, such as yx, is something whose value is obtained
by mathematical processes when x is given. A logical function of x, of which we have,
as common examples, letters with a subscript x, as Px, is something whose signification
is logically deducible when the signification of x is known.
116
WRITINGS OF CHARLES S. PEIRCE, 1872-1878
shades of color, days or seconds of time. Anything which belongs to
the limited universe under consideration is called, in the theory of
probabilities, an event. An expression like [t], where t is a relative
term, is termed a relative number, average number, or probable
number. If the relative term to which the average number refers is
one of those relatives which are formed by adding a comma to the
symbol for an absolute term, as m, then the relative number is called
a probability. For example, [mj is the average number of men that
anything is, but it is usually called the probability that anything is a
man.
The importance of average numbers arises from the fact that all
our knowledge really consists of nothing but average numbers; for all
our knowledge is derived from induction, and its analogue, hypothe-
sis. Now, the scientific conduct of this kind of reasoning is highly
complex, because all sorts of precautions have to be attended to, and
it has to be accompanied by a great deal of deduction. But the
general nature of induction is everywhere the same, and is com-
pletely typified in the following example. From a bag of mixed black
and white beans I take out a handful, and count the number of black
and the number of white beans, and I assume that the black and
white are nearly in the same ratio throughout the bag. If I am in error
in this conclusion, it is an error which a repetition of the same process
must tend to rectify. It is, therefore, a valid inference. But it clearly
teaches me nothing in reference to the color of any particular bean.
Of that I am as ignorant as before. The case is not in the least altered
if I find all the beans of my handful to be black, or all to be white.
I can still infer only the approximate general ratio, and it is only this
I express when I say the observation makes the probability of any one
bean being white or being black very great; for a probability is itself
only an average number. At first thought it is hard to admit this; but
the difficulty will be in great measure removed if we consider how
it is that the knowledge of average numbers becomes useful in partic-
ular cases. Suppose we know the relative number of black beans in
a certain bag; then, if we draw a large number of beans out of it, we
know that the total number of black beans we shall draw will be
equal to the number of drawings multiplied by the average number
of beans in the bag. Suppose we know the relative numbers of black
beans in a large number of bags, containing different proportions;
then, if the beans are well mixed up in each, we may only draw a
single bean from each, and yet we can predict nearly the total num-
ber of black beans which would be drawn by simply taking the sum
Theory of Errors of Observation, 1873
117
of the relative numbers. If the black beans had a value while the
white ones were worthless, then the total number of black beans
which would be drawn would be the important thing to know. But
as knowledge derives its practical importance from its influence
upon our conduct, let us suppose that at every drawing we have our
choice between two bags to draw from; then the man who knew the
relative number of black beans in every bag would act in every case
as though the bean he would draw from the bag which contained the
larger proportion of black ones were known to be black, and as
though the bean he would draw from the other were certainly white.
Strictly speaking, he would know nothing about the beans that would
be drawn in the particular case, but he would have a knowledge
which would be so far equivalent to that that it would influence his
conduct in the particular case. This is the only knowledge we ever
have, a knowledge of what assumption to make in the particular case
in order to do the best in the long run. Whenever, then, we have to
do with a value, the sum-total of which in the long run is the only
thing which concerns us, the average amount of it is important to be
known; but in all other cases the average numbers are of no conse-
quence.
It is evident that in the example just given it would be a valuable
increase of knowledge to know, for instance, what the difference in
the relative number of black beans at the top and bottom of a bag
was, and any limitation of the "universe" used which should separate
a relative number into two different ones would be advantageous.
There are many problems in probabilities, which, being solved,
give a relative number composed of two terms, one known and the
other unknown. Such an indeterminate result shows that a wider
"universe" must be adopted for one of the terms of the relative
number.
The fundamental arithmetical formulae relating to relative num-
bers are as follows:
We have seen that the relative number of things that are men, or
[m,1]
the probability that a thing is a man, is equal to * . By "thing"
[1]
here is meant any object of our limited universe, as, for example, an
animal. But we may wish to consider the relative number of animals
that are men when our limited universe is a wider class than animal.
[m,1]
In this case, a denoting an animal, we write this probability _\ .
[a]
Let us suppose that, our universe being "day," we wish to know the
118
WRITINGS OF CHARLES S. PEIRCE, 1872-1878
probability that if it thunders on any day it will rain on that day. To
say that if it thunders it will rain on the same day is the same as to
say that every day on which it thunders is a day on which it rains.
Then let t be a day on which it thunders and r a day on which it rains,
[ t , r ]
and the probability in question is * . In general, the probability
[ t [
that if one event happens another will happen is equal to the proba-
bility that both will happen, divided by the probability that the first
will happen.
Let us now see how to express the probability that a certain
quantity will have a certain value. It is clearly implied that the quan-
tity is defined in some other way than by its value. It might be, for
instance, the length of time a bird will be on wing. Let x be this
[ t , r ]
quantity, and let n be any definite value. Then * , or the number LXJ
of cases in which the time a bird is flying has that value, divided by
the whole number of cases of a bird's flying, is the probability that
a bird will fly for that length of time. But since time is continuous,
the length of time a bird may be up may have an infinite number of
different values. Consequently, the probability of any one is zero.
We, therefore, seek the probability that the time lies between n and
n + An; and if An is infinitesimal, (say dn,) then the probability is
proportional to dn. We may, therefore, write this probability thus,
[nx] dn. Here nx denotes the case of the value of x being about n.
The probability that if one quantity, x, has a value lying between
m and m + dm, then another quantity, y, has a value lying between
n and n + dn, will, according to what has been said, be equal to
the probability that both x and y will have the supposed values,
divided by the probability that x will have the supposed value, or
[mx,ny]
will be -—— , or, since the am disappeared by cancella-
[ m x , n y ]
[mx,ny]
tion, ——————dn
[mx,ny]
Given, the probability of A, the probability of B, and the probabil-
ity that if A happens, B happens. Required, the probability that if B
happens, A happens.
The probability of A is [A].
The probability of B is [B].
[mx,ny]The probability that if A then B is ^J^.
[A]
Theory of Errors of Observation, 1873
[A,B]
The probability that if B then A is ^*f^. [B]
Then we have—
119
[A, B] _ [A, B]
~[BT " TAT [ J " [ ] [formula]
" [A] -[B[
or the probability, if B happens that A happens, is equal to the
probability if A happens th B happens, multiplied by the probabil-
ity of A and divided by the robability of B.
We now pass to the theory of observations. An observation gives
us the value of a certain quantity which is connected with an un-
known quantity in such a way as to be partly dependent on the latter
value, and partly on accidental circumstances, not capable of being
separately taken account of.
These accidental variations are, however, in all cases subject to a
statistical law, so that (observations of a certain kind forming the
limited universe, X being the unknown quantity, S the quantity
observed) the quantity,
KEC* n^rd*[formula]
or the probability that if the unknown quantity X has a certain value
x, then the observed quantity 5 will have a value between £ and
| 4- d|, is a certain arithmetical function of the values | and x. If we
write e for £ — x, or the error of observation, then we may put <p for
such a function that—[formula]
Ks. *xl , .
The special form of the function (p is called the law of the facility
of the errors. Except so far as this law is known, an observation can
afford us no information whatever. The following conditions are in-
variably fulfilled by this function. (It must be understood that only
real quantities are considered.)
1. It has but one value for each set of values of its variables.
2. Its value is always positive and less than unity.
3. It vanishes when € is infinite.
130
WRITINGS OF CHARLES S. PEIRCE, 1872-1878
4. Its integral relatively to e from — oo to + oo is always unity.
Beyond this the form of the function is determined by the
peculiarities of the kind of observations.
The probability that if the observed quantity H has the value £,
then the unknown quantity X has the value x is—
[xx, ?=]/[?=] dx
The value of this probability is for any particular kind of observations
an arithmetical function of € and £, which we may write x|/ (€, £) de.
The probability that the unknown quantity X has the value x
without reference to observation is [:rx]d:r. This is in any case a
function of x, which may be written Wx . dx.
The probability that the quantity given by observation E has the
value £, without reference to the value of the unknown quantity, is
[£~] d£. This an arithmetical function of £, which may be 4>£ . d£.
If <!>!, Wx, and <p (€, x) are given, then we can obtain \\t (e, £) thus:
?(e,? = f (e, X)/? ? ?x[formula]
Suppose a numb of independent observations to be made. Then
we shall have a series of functions—
    f1 (e1,x)
  f2 (e2,x)
  f3 (e3,x)
&c.[formula]
  ?1 ?1
?2 ?2
  ?3 ?3
&c.
then the probability that if the quantities observed have the values
£ i > £ 2 * £ s > & c - > t h e u n k n o w n q u a n t i t y X h a s t h e v a l u e x w i l l b e —
^x . — . — . — .&c.
^x . — . — . — .&c.
^x . — . — . — .&c.
or—[formula]
^x . — . — . — .&c.
Theory of Errors of Observation, 1873
121
The probability Vx . dx antecedent to all observations will be
simply dr, and, therefore, the factor ** may be omitted in the above
expression.
It will be perceived that observation never gives us to know a
number expressing the value of the unknown quantity, but only a
function expressing the probability of each value. It happens, how-
ever, in a very comprehensive case, that this function assumes a form
which involves but two constants, so that in this case observation may
be said to give us two numbers, a value for the unknown quantity,
and the probable error of that value.
Mr. Crofton's method of considering this case seems to me to
make it more comprehensible than any other. Suppose that the un-
known quantity X has been observed twice, the values given by
observation being ?1 and ?2. Put [?] for ?1 + ?2. What then is the
probability that if x is the value of X, the sum of the values given by
the two observations will be [£]. It is clearly—
?+8 -8 f1 (e1, x). f2([e] — e1, x). de1
Developing cp2([e] — €1? x) by powers of €1? this integral becomes—
f2([e], x) — f'2([e], x) ?+8 -8 e1 f1(e1, x).de1
+ 1/2 f"2([e], x) ?+8 -8 e2/1 f1 (e1, x).de1
+ 1/2 f"2([e], x) ?+8 -8 e2/1 f1 (e1, x).de1
If in place of two we have n observations, the probability that the
sum of all will be [£] is—
+ 1/2 f"2([e], x) ?+8 -8 e2/1 f1 (e1, x).de1
+ 1/2 f"2([e], x) ?+8 -8 e2/1 f1 (e1, x).de1
Of these co-efficients—
?+8 -8 ei fi (ei, x)[formula]
122
WRITINGS OF CHARLES S. PEIRCE, 1872-1878
is the probable or mean value of the error of the observed quantity-
?+8 -8 ei fi (ei, x)
is half the probable value of the square of this error, and so on. The
probable value of the error is often less than the probable value of
its square, owing to positive and negative errors balancing. But the
co-efficients which involve the cube and higher powers of the error
may often become insignificant. This, for example, will be the case
if n is very great; for then, in comparison with the sum of all the
errors, the value of any one will be very small. In fact, in this case
we may neglect a quantity a certain number of times, say M, larger
than what we could neglect before, and may take a unit of measure-
ment M times larger. Then if—
W, [*2]> t*3], &c.,[formula]
be the probable value of the error, the error square, the error cube,
&c., on the old scale of measures, their numerical values on the new
scale will be—
M' M2' M3
Consequently if M is sufficiently large, the higher co-efficients may
be neglected. It also frequently happens that the error of each obser-
vation is due to the combined effect of a great number of indepen-
dent or nearly independent causes, each one of which alone would
produce but an insignificant effect. In this case, by the same reason-
ing the higher co-efficients will disappear.
The manner in which sensation and volition are propagated
through the nerves is unknown, but it must be by some very compli-
cated process, because it is very slow compared with the rate of
propagation of sound. It is, therefore, probable that there may be
variations of the rate of passage, and that the velocity through each
small portion of the whole length of the nerve is to some extent
independent of the velocity through the other parts. If this is so, the
whole time of propagation would be subject to a variation, the proba-
Theory of Errors of Observation, 1873
123
bl lues of whose cube and higher powers would be insignificant.
H ver this may be, it appears to be a fact that in all carefully-made
observations, the error of which is due to the inevitable inaccuracy
of the action of the human nerves, the probable values of the cube,
&c., of the errors are very small.
Whenever these quantities disappear it can be proved by an ana-
lytical process which need not be reproduced here that—
<P(*, x) = 77^6[formula]
where h and E are quantities which depend upon x. We thus reach
the fundamental formula of the method of least squares.
It is not the object of this paper to explain that method itself. Only
it may be remarked that in the deduction of it which is usually given,
it is assumed that what we wish to obtain from observations in any
case (whether the method of least squares is applicable or not) is the
most probable value of the unknown quantity. This is not the case,
for there is but an infinitesimal probability in favor of any one value.
Suppose that the cause of error in observing the place of a star were
a nearly simple oscillation of the image about its mean point. Then
the most probable errors would be the extreme ones. But we should
much prefer to assume as the value the probable or mean value than
the most probable value, which would be removed the furthest possi-
ble from that value. The conception of the matter is this. What
observation has to teach us is & function, i|/ (c, Q, not a mere number.
But in cases to which the method of least squares is applicable, this
function is completely determined by two numbers, which are the
value of the unknown quantity derived from the application of that
method and the value of its probable error.2
It is assumed in treatises on least squares that 4>£. d£, or the
probability (without regard to the value of the unknown quantity)
that the quantity observed will have a value between £ and £ -f d(j,
is equal to d£. When this is not the case it is only necessary to weight
each observation by dividing by 4>£.
If the probability of error does not follow that law which the
method of least squares supposes, that is to say, if the probability of
2. The term probable error is here used in its usual but unanalogical sense, and
not for the probable value of the error, which is always assumed to be zero in least
squares, or else determined by some special research.
124
WRITINGS OF CHARLES S. PEIRCE, 1872-1878
the error x in the mean of a large number of observations is not equal
t o — — 6 x , w h e r e h i s a c o n s t a n t i n d e p e n d e n t o f x , t h e n i t m u s t
to —— 6 x , where h is a constant independent of x, then it must VQ
at least be of this form if h be considered to be a function of x. Now,
h2 is the weight which has to be assigned to an observation in the
application of the method of least squares; and therefore when this
method does not apply in its unmodified form, it is only necessary to
find what function of x, h must be in order to give the required law
of facility of errors, and then proceed according to the method of
least squares, after having weighted each observation by h2. Let the
equation which represents the facility of error be plotted, the error
being taken as abscissae, and the probability of that error as ordinate;
1 -x2
then plot on the same diagram the curve y = —j—6 - Let us
V0[formula]
suppose, then, that a certain value of x, y, is A times as great for the
actual curve of errors as it is for the normal least-squares curve. Now,
if h be increased in the ratio A, the ordinates will be increased in this
same ratio, and the abscissae will be diminished in the inverse ratio
so that the area of the curve is preserved. But if the ordinates at any
one point are to be increased in the ratio A, then the abscissae at that
point must be contracted in the inverse ratio, so as to preserve the
area; so that if we had a function fx such that Dx fx = J, then the
probability of this function of the error would follow the law
1 ( f x ) 2[formula]
1y = —— 6~ , and consequently is the weight which
| Q |Q
has to be assigned to any such observation in applying the method
of least squares. It will be observed that since the weight depends on
the value of the error, it will be necessary first to make an approxi-
mate solution of the problem in order to get an approximate value
of the error from which to determine the weight, so that when the
method of least squares is not applicable in its unmodified form, an
approximate method must necessarily be resorted to.
Let us now proceed to consider the method of ascertaining the
law of facility of error. In any case, if the error is compounded of an
infinite number of infinitely small errors, or approximates to being
so, then the law of facility of errors is of that general form which the
method of least squares prescribes, and nothing remains indetermi-
nate excepting the value of h. Observation has sufficiently shown that
Theory of Errors of Observation, 1873 125
in transit-observations the law of error is of this sort. I copy, for
example, from Chauvenet's Astronomy the following table, taken
from BesseFs Fundamenta Astronomiae, showing the errors made by
Bradley in observing Sirius and Procyon:
Between —
No. of errors
by the theory
No. of errors
by experience[formula]
" "
0.0 and 0.1
95
94
0.1 and 0.2
89
88
0.2 and 0.3
78
78
0.3 and 0.4
64
58
0.4 and 0.5
50
51
0.5 and 0.6
36
36
0.6 and 0.7
24
26
0.7 and 0.8
15
14
0.8 and 0.9
9
10
0.9 and 1.0
5
7
Over 1.0
5
8
Fechner, in his Elemente der Psychophysik, has, in connection
with his psychophysical law, discussed the applicability of the
method to cases of sensation generally such as the estimate of the
relative weights of two masses, and he finds that if v be the energy
of the force which produces the excitation of any nerve, then if log v
be considered as the observed quantity, the errors of the observed
quantity will follow the law of least squares. Strictly speaking, the law
of least squares recognizes the possibility of any error positive or
negative, however great, although the probability of indefinitely
great errors will be indefinitely small. It occurred to me that in the
case of the emersion of a star from an occultation, since it was impos-
sible to strike the chronograph-key too early, while it might be struck
indefinitely too late, the law of least squares could hardly apply, and
I have made some experiments upon this point, which I will narrate
in detail at the end of this paper, merely remarking in this place that
the divergence from the theoretical law proved to be insignificant.
On the other hand, there are many cases in which we have no reason
126
WRITINGS OF CHARLES S. PEIRCE, 1872-1878
to expect that the errors will vary according to the least-squares
curve. Let us consider, for example, a chemical analysis. Here the
error is generally not due to the combined action of a very great
number of very small causes, but, on the contrary, there are gener-
ally two or three leading causes of error, depending upon some
defect in the theory of the analysis or on some error in the manipula-
tion, which is likely to result from a single one, such as cannot be
regarded as in any way compounded of a large number of indepen-
dent parts. Thus, a drop may be spilled or a portion thrown out of
the crucible too small to be detected, but the whole drop is spilled
at once, or the whole portion goes at once. In very exact analysis, in
which such causes are almost altogether eliminated, the remaining
and chief cause of error will be an error of weighing, due to a want
of delicacy of the balance, and will be of the same nature as an error
of computation, due to the fact that the number of decimal places
used has been limited. The method of considering such errors is
treated by Dr. Bremiker, in the preface to his Tabula Logarith-
morum Sex Decimalium, a work to which the attention of chemists
ought to be drawn. When the law of facility of errors cannot be
deduced a priori from the consideration of the causes to which it is
due, a large number of experimental observations must be made
upon a known quantity in order to find in what manner the errors
vary, or the same series of observations may be used both to deter-
mine what the value of the unknown quantity is and also what the
law of the variation of errors is. Thus, in the method of least squares,
h is to be determined empirically, and the common way of doing it
is to use the actual observations by which the unknown quantity is
determined to determine also the value of h. In doing this, it should
be remembered that a precise and trustworthy determination can
only be obtained from a large number of observations. This proce-
dure amounts, in fact, to adding an additional unknown quantity, a
very obvious fact, and yet one which is habitually overlooked. Encke,
in his Astronomisches Jahrbuch for 1834, has given the most com-
plete formulas that I have anywhere found for determining the value
of h, as well as its uncertainty. These formulae require correction on
account of the circumstance just mentioned.
When it is necessary to combine, by least squares, observations of
different orders of precision, they are weighted proportionately to
h2
. If we have two series of observations, one of which is as accurate
Theory of Errors of Observation, 1873 127
as you please, and the other as inaccurate as you please, a better
result than that which the most accurate series of measures gives can
always be got by combining with it the least accurate series, provided
the proper weights are given to the two series. This proposition
seems paradoxical, and is not admitted by many very competent
heads, but I cannot see how the conclusion can possibly be evaded.
It does not depend at all upon any of the peculiar principles used by
the method of least squares, but rests on the fundamental axioms of
probabilities. Indeed, it may conveniently be based directly upon the
principles of logic itself. The least accurate series of measures offers
certain facts, which may be used as premises, and it cannot be that
if those facts are properly used they leave us in greater ignorance
than we were before. Additional facts must increase our knowledge,
if the proper inferences are made from them, and, therefore, an
additional series of observations, if it have any weight at all, must, if
its proper weight be assigned to it, improve the value of the unknown
quantity. On the other hand, when it is considered that there is an
uncertainty in the value of h, it may be that if the two series of
observations differ greatly in accuracy, and the value of h is not
determined with much precision, it may be better at once to take the
result of the best series of observations than to combine the two
series with the best weights that we are able to give.
Let—
Xj be the value from any set of observations;
€j the mean error of this set;
{€{ the mean error of €{;
Wj the true weight;
E the mean error of weight one; and
x the truly weighted mean.
derive wi y the formula,
The best approximation we can get to x will be subject to two
kinds of error: first, those arising from errors of xi; and, secondly,
those arising from errors in our assumed values of €j, from which we
derive wi y the formula,
128
WRITINGS OF CHARLES S. PEIRCE, 1872-1878
Wi = E²/ei²
The mean error of wi will be wi² gi²
The mean error of wi will be wi² gi²
T h e m e a n e r r o r o f w i w i l l b e w i ² g i²
Then we have—
••-^(^r)1-'*'
••-^(^r)1-'*'
••-^(^r)1-'*'[formula]
These are the two common rules by which € may be calculated. Call
their results €; and e", so that—
their results €; and e", so that—
their results €; and e", so that—
where m is the number of determinations.
The first gives—
their results €; and e", so that—
Theory of Errors of Observation, 1873 129
If m - 2,
lXl + w2x2 w2
(Xi — X) = X; = Xi — Xo
Wj_
+ W[formula]
Wj_ + W
WRITINGS OF CHARLES S. PEIRCE, 1872-1878
WRITINGS OF CHARLES S. PEIRCE, 1872-1878
Put w2 =r,
WRITINGS OF CHARLES S. PEIRCE, 1872-1878
WRITINGS OF CHARLES S. PEIRCE, 1872-1878
WRITINGS OF CHARLES S. PEIRCE, 1872-1878
WRITINGS OF CHARLES S. PEIRCE, 1872-1878
WRITINGS OF CHARLES S. PEIRCE, 1872-1878
Now, suppose e2 < e1²< e2²; then r < 1; then—
e 1 ² > e 1 ² + r / ( 1 + r )² ( g 1² + g 2² ) e "²[formula]
But—
e1² > e1² + r/(1 + r)² (g1² + g2²) e"²
1030
WRITINGS OF CHARLES S. PEIRCE, 1872-1878
r—^— >gf +gl
r—^— >gf +glx
r — ^ — > g f + g l
r—^— >gf +gl
r—^— >gf +gl
r—^— >gf +gl[formula]
r—^— >gf +gl
r—^— >gf +gl
r—^— >gf +gl
Unless this condition is satisfied, the combination is worse than
the best determination.
It is generally admitted that m{ being the number of observations
from which c
gi =
Then
Then
Theory of Errors of Observation, 1873 131
or we may write—
hardly be supposed that the best observer has so small a range of
or—
e1² + e2²
/ (x1 – x2)² (1 + r)² >
1/m1 + 1/m2
2
or we may write—
(x1 – x2)² (x1 – x2)²
(x1 – x2)² (x1 – x2)²[formula]
(x1 – x2)²
(x1 – x2)²
(x1 – x2)² (x1 – x2)²
Some writers upon the subject have wished to assign a smaller
weight to those observations which differ largely from the mean than
to those which come close to it. They have reasoned as if h, or the
precision of an observation, were something which belonged to a
single observation; whereas, in fact, it is a statistical quantity alto-
gether, and belongs only to an observation as a member of a certain
series. We may have a large series of observations for which h has a
certain value, and those observations may perhaps be separated into
two series on some principle or other for which h shall have two
different values, and if this can be done there is an advantage in
doing it. It is, in fact, limiting our universe. In probabilities generally
h is a mean or probable quantity for a series of observations, and if
we can divide our universe into two parts, getting different values of
h, it will be an increase of knowledge to do so. For example, suppose
that some of the observations were taken under one set of circum-
stances and the rest under another set of circumstances. That would
afford a principle upon which the observations could be distin-
guished, and if the value of h for the two sets turned out different,
it would be an advantage to separate them and to give them different
weights. Now, the degree of discordance of observations from the
most probable value of the unknown quantity may be taken as a
13.2
WRITINGS LES S. PEIRCE, 1872-1878
means of estimating the relative degrees of care, &c., used in making
them, and so to discriminate between them. But it would certainly
be very absurd to allow no weight to the fact that we have endeav-
ored to make them all with equal care. It must never be forgotten
that h is a statistical quantity; not one which belongs to a single
observation, but one which belongs to an infinite series of observa-
tions.
It is entirely in accordance with the method of least squares to
reject discordant observations, and this has always been done, even
by those who object to an exact criterion for determining what obser-
vations should be rejected. For example, Mr. Glaisher says that no
observation should be rejected excepting obvious mistakes, thereby
admitting that it is proper sometimes to reject observations, and
nobody is more opposed to the rejection of observations than he. But
no line of demarkation can be drawn between mistakes which are
obvious and mistakes which are not obvious. In some cases it may be
obvious that 53 has been written by the recorder instead of 35. In
other cases it may be doubtful whether it ought to be called an
obvious mistake or whether there may be some doubt hanging over
it, and there is every grade of probability, from the greatest to the
least; and when we examine into the facts of observation, and do not
attempt to make our way through a vacuous space of pure theory, it
will be found that the occasional rejection of observations is justified
from every point of view; and if observations are to be rejected, exact
criteria are necessary to determine upon principles of probabilities
in what cases they should be rejected. The criterion of Professor
Peirce is the only one which conforms rigidly to those principles, and,
indeed, I am not aware that it has been attacked upon the ground
of not conforming to the principles of probabilities, although it has
been attacked on the ground that no such criterion should be used,
and that no observation should be rejected except upon principles of
guesswork, for that is what it amounts to to say that none but obvious
mistakes should be rejected. Experience has shown that the errors
which this criterion rejects are almost precisely those which a person
of sound judgment would pronounce to be obvious mistakes, but
some other criteria have been proposed, which are confessedly inex-
act, but which have the advantage of involving less calculation, but
these are no better than the unaided judgment of an experienced
person, and in some cases not so good.
Theory of Errors of Observation, 1873
133
Account of the experiments
These experiments were made in order to study the distribution
of errors in the observation of a phenomenon not seen coming on,
as in the case of a transit, but sudden, as in the case of the emersion
of a star from behind the moon. The time was noted upon a Hipp
chronoscope, which is a modification of an invention of Wheat-
stone's. The train of clock-work moved by weight is regulated by the
vibration of a little spring or reed striking against a toothed wheel a
thousand times a second. There are two hands, one of which marks
tenths of a second, and the other thousandths of a second. These
hands are thrown into gear when the first event occurs, and out of
gear when the second event occurs, so that the amount that they
have moved measures the interval. The manner in which they are
thrown in and out of gear is this: The axis of one of the wheels of the
main train is hung, and the axis of one of the wheels of the hand-
gearing passes completely through it and comes out behind, where
it rests upon a spring, which spring is influenced by an electro-
magnet. There are two crown-wheels, one upon the hollow axis be-
longing to the main train already mentioned, the other facing it at
a very small distance from it, and fixed in position and upon the axis
of the wheel belonging to the hand-gearing, which moves backward
and forward inside, and the other axis as described. There is a little
arm, which will catch in the teeth of one or other of these crown-
wheels. Before the first event it is in the teeth of the fixed crown-
wheel, which thus prevents the hands from turning round. When the
first event occurs this arm is thrown forward into the teeth of the
rapidly rotating crown-wheel, and thus the hands begin to turn
round. When the second event occurs the arm is thrown into the
teeth of the first crown-wheel, and so the hands are suddenly
stopped.
It will be observed that although the instrument only registers to
thousandths of a second, yet if an event can be repeated many times
with a variation of time much smaller than that, the instrument
ought, theoretically, in the mean of a large number of observations,
to give a much closer result than 0.001 second; for when the first
event occurs, and the arm is thrown into the moving crown-wheel,
it probably will not strike exactly in any catch, but will strike on the
inclined side of a tooth. If it strikes on the forward side of the tooth,
134
WRITINGS OF CHARLES S. PEIRCE, 1872-1878
the hands will be carried forward by the fraction of a thousandth of
a second more as the arm glides down this side to the bottom of the
catch. But if it strikes on the back side of the tooth, the hands will
be carried relatively back the fraction of the thousandth part of a
second as the arm glides back to the bottom of the catch. Now, if the
top of the tooth is midway between the bottom of two catches, it is
equally likely to be carried forward or back. The same thing occurs
when the second event happens and the arm strikes upon the fixed
crown-wheel. An error in the marked interval will thus result, which
error may amount to —0.001 second in the extreme, or to + 0.001
second, and any one error between these limits is as likely as any
other; consequently, these errors, being entirely incidental and inde-
pendent of one another, they will balance one another in the mean
of a large number of observations, and thus a much higher degree of
accuracy may be reached. This, however, is a matter which has no
influence on the experiments which I have made, inasmuch as the
interval measured by me was a variable one, and in point of fact I
have never been able to make the instrument work with such nicety
as to measure much closer than 0.001 second. In the descriptions of
this instrument which I have seen, only two instrumental corrections
have been mentioned; one is owing to the rate with which the instru-
ment goes, and the other is with reference to the time occupied by
the arm in passing from one crown-wheel to the other. To determine
these two constants, a little apparatus accompanies the instrument,
by which the time of the fall of a ball from different heights may be
registered, and by registering the time from two different heights
these two corrections, one of which is proportional to the time and
the other is a constant, may be determined. The ball is held in a pair
of jaws; when these jaws separate, the contact is broken, the hands
begin to move, and the ball begins to fall. Care should be taken that
the ball is so small that the jaws cannot be separated for any apprecia-
ble time before the ball is free to fall, but if the spring with which
they open is sufficiently strong the ball may fall freely from the very
first. At the bottom the ball strikes upon a platform made of wood and
covered with green cloth, and it throws this platform down upon two
metallic springs below it, through which contact is made again, so
that the hand stops, and then the platform is held down by a catch.
As the instrument came from the makers it was found that when
the ball struck upon the platform it threw one of the springs down,
so that the contact was made, and then immediately interrupted
Theory of Errors of Observation, 1873 135
before there was time for the hand to stop, so that a slight error of
about 0.001 second arose in this way. This was usually corrected by
putting little wooden wedges beneath these springs, so that they
could not be thrown down in this way. In order further to test the
instrument, I made use of a break-circuit chronometer, and mea-
sured the interval of two seconds upon the instrument for this pur-
pose. It was necessary to employ two telegraph-repeaters. There are
two ways in which this can be arranged, so as to correct a break-
circuit chronometer with a Hipp chronoscope. It is sufficient to de-
scribe one of them. The arrangement is shown in the accompanying
figure:
Bat. is the battery; Ch., the chronoscope; Chr., the chronometer;
R., a resistance-coil; and I and II, two telegraph-repeaters. I is a
common telegraph-repeater, with the non-conducting screw so far
raised that when the armature once flies up the magnet cannot bring
it down again. F is the magnet end of this repeater; B, the end at the
second circuit. When the first circuit is broken the armature flies up
and instantly breaks the second circuit. II is arranged differently
from common repeaters. As long as there is a current through the
first circuit and the armature is held down, there is no connection in
the second circuit. When the first circuit is broken, the armature,
under the influence of a very strong spring, flies up for a distance of
a tenth of a millimeter, and there makes the connection in the second
circuit.
This repeater can be extemporized out of a common relay. The
resistance-coil should always be used in connection with the chrono-
scope in such a way that when the circuit is broken in the first place
the current shall be so weak as just to be able to hold the hands still,
while when it is made again the current shall be so strong as to make
the circuit as quickly as possible.
The rate as given by the break-circuit chronometer did not agree
with that found by the fall-apparatus, and indeed there was a slight
discrepancy in the rate given by the latter for different heights of fall.
Professor J. E. Oliver suggested to me that this discrepancy was due
to a retardation of the instrument when the hands were geared in,
which took place somewhat gradually, and I found that this was the
case, and that the ear could detect that when the hands were geared
in, during the space of three-fourths of a second, the note produced
by the vibration of the reed was lowered about the sixth of a tone.
The supposition that this took place uniformly sufficiently accounted
136
WRITINGS OF CHARLES S. PEIRCE, 1872-1878
for all the discrepancy, and this gave me two more instrumental
constants, viz: the amount of retardation on gearing in the hands, and
the time during which that retardation was brought about. With this
instrument as well as with the other chronometer I made a large
number of experiments upon the time occupied in answering signals
of various kinds, such as the emission of points upon paper from
behind a screen, the appearance of induction-sparks from a Ruhm-
korff coil, flashes of light thrown upon a screen, sudden changes from
one magic-lantern figure to another, &c., the general result of which
was to confirm the facts already in our possession, and which are due
to the researches of Hirsch, Daumbusch, and others. But there was
one series of experiments which deserves particular description. I
employed a young man about eighteen years of age, who had had no
previous experience whatever in observations, to answer a signal
consisting of a sharp sound like a rap, the answer being made upon
a telegraph-operator's key nicely adjusted. Five hundred observa-
tions were made on every week-day during a month, twenty-four
days' observations in all. The results are given in the accompanying
table, and are also shown upon plate No. 27. On this plate the abscissae
represent the interval of time between the signal and the answer as
indicated on the Hipp chronoscope, the ordinates measure the num-
ber of observations, which were subject to a large amount of error.
The curve has, however, not been plotted directly from the observa-
tions, but after they have been smoothed off by the addition of adja-
cent numbers in the table eight times over, so as to diminish the
irregularities of the curve. The smoother curve on the figures is a
mean curve for every day drawn by eye so as to eliminate the ir-
regularities entirely. It was found that after the first two or three days
the curve differed very little from that derived from the theory of
least squares. It will be noticed that on the first day, when the ob-
server was entirely inexperienced, the observations scattered to such
an extent that I have been obliged to draw the curve upon a different
scale from that adopted for the other days. It will also be seen that
the personal equation from the mean amount by which the answer
came too late rapidly decreased for the first five days, until it was
about one seventh of a second, and that it then gradually increased
until the twelfth day, when it amounted to about 0.22 seconds. But
while the personal equation was thus first diminishing and afterward
increasing, the probable error or range of errors was constantly de-
creasing after the twelfth day. There was some variation in the per-
Theory of Errors of Observation, 1873
137
sonal equat n, but not much, but the range of errors continually
decreased as long as the observations lasted, and so remarkably that
for the twenty-fourth day the probable error does not exceed one-
eightieth of a second. I think that this clearly demonstrates the value
of such practice in training the nerves for observation, for it can
hardly be supposed that the best observer has so small a range of
error as this, and I would therefore recommend that transit-observ-
ers be kept in constant training by means of some observations of an
artificial event which can be repeated with rapidity, so that several
hundred can be taken daily without great labor, and I do not think
that it is essential that these observations should very closely imitate
the transit of a star over wires, inasmuch as it is the general condition
of the nerves which it is important to keep in training more than
anything peculiar to this or that kind of observation.
